**Cover/Title Page:**
“Life is like a see-saw.
We all share in its ups and downs.
But a little bit of smile,
Will over weigh a load of frown.”

© DOSU ALABI

Reprint 2017

All Right Reserved.

No part of this Publication may be
reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical
including photocopy, recording or any
information storage and retrieval systems,
without the written permission of the publisher.

**DEDICATION**

This booklet is dedicated to my dear wife and loving children who have supported and stood by me through thick and thin and never doubted my ability to succeed in life. Also, my late senior Sister Marian Mopelola Oni (Nee Alabi) who I adore and should not be forgotten. My senior brother Chief Samuel Oyetunji Alabi who was also there for me in the early stages and specially my mother - in - law, Late Mrs. Janet Alaba Adeyemi who laboured relentlessly to see that all is well with us but died in the process. A real mother in Israel.

MR. DOSU ALABI

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

It is prudent to appreciate certain personalities for their contributions in making sure that this booklet became a reality.
My daughters Mrs. O. Makanjuola, and Mrs. Y Maeba by reading through the manuscripts, editing and typing them out. My son - in - law Mr. L. Maeba by designing and producing the front cover. All my grandchildren for putting their heads together, displaying their computer knowledge to produce artistic works for the booklet. Special thanks also go to all my children at home and abroad for providing the back-up for the production of the booklet after reading through. God bless you all.

**MR. DOSU ALABI**

**CONTENTS**

| Page |    |
|---|---|
| Forward - Akin Ayiedun Esq. | iv  |
| Forward - Dr. Lekan Aare   | vi  |
| Prologue - Lekan Alabi    | vii |
| Acknowledgments    | viii|

**Chapter**

| Page |    |
|---|---|
| One  | Early Childhood    | 1   |
| Two  | Education and Formative Years | 4   |
| Three | Vocational Training    | 6   |
| Four  | Trip to Lagos and subsequent |    |
|    | Employments    | 12  |
| Five  | Travel to the United Kingdom | 16  |
| Six   | Life in the United Kingdom | 18  |
| Seven  | Return to Nigeria    | 26  |
| Eight | Experience of Life    | 34  |
| Nine  | Return to Ibadan    | 37  |
| Ten   | Settled down finally in Ibadan | 40  |

**FOREWORD**

I consider it a privilege to write the foreword to this booklet authored by Mr. Dosu Alabi. Mr. Alabi, although a few months older than myself was born in the same year, 1933 as myself. During his formative years, we shared a common bond. My mother, Madam Christiana Nihinlola Alabi was his Sirempo, who took care of him as a very young boy.

I therefore interacted closely with Mr. Dosu Alabi during our primary school days in the 1940s. He had by then developed trails of a straight forward person who would not cheat those of us who were his juniors. He was however humorous and appeared not to take anything too seriously. I lost touch with Dosu after he left Ibadan for Lagos and elsewhere. We re-united only in the last fifteen years or so. His journey through life has been punctuated with many “downs” and some “ups”. The document presents an account of a person determined to succeed in life in spite of the ever-recurring challenges, many times man-made, cropping up from time to time as he journeyed through life. Many times his belief in God was shaken. He sought help from different quarters only to finally return to the path of sanity. Happily though, he eventually achieved his ambition to become a second professional builder, a water-proofing expert of great repute, a principled man, as well as a happy family man. This should be an inspiration to every young person. He reminds us all not to “give up the fight” in the face of adversaries. The lesson for us all is that the journey through life is not always smooth. Only those who wish to take up the challenges confronting them and overcome them stand a good chance to succeed in life. Mr Dosu Alabi succeeded primarily because of his belief in his own ability, hard work, some luck and above all, trust in God. He is a pride to those of us who are his colleagues.

I sincerely recommend this booklet to every youth. There is a lot to learn if one is to succeed in life. Mr Dosu Alabi succeeded primarily because of his belief in his own ability, hard work, some luck and above all, trust in God. He is a pride to those of us who are his colleagues.

**PROLOGUE**

Writing of an autobiography is, in my opinion, not considered worthwhile in Nigeria largely for two reasons.

First, there is no market for biographies as Nigerians usually abandon reading once they have achieved their life mission of acquiring professional or academic qualifications.

Reading for pleasure is yet to be a hobby in Nigeria, a situation exacerbated by television and the advent of the internet.

Second, the literary minded few have a strong preference for foreign journals and literature.

In spite of all these factors, the urge to write one’s life stories may become most compelling in some individuals. Everyone has his own reasons for recording his life history. My brother has his own reasons too; and these are embedded in this brief story of his life.

In it the author illuminates, from his own perspective, the dark corners of a large polygamous family. Perhaps this is one of the reasons.

Perhaps

**LEKAN ALABI**
(Festac Town, Lagos)

**PLANNING THE TITLE OF THE BOOK**

**CHAPTER ONE**
**EARLY CHILDHOOD**

There is a saying that goes thus “there is a tide in the affairs of man, when it rises, often lead to fomure”.

The idea to write about my life has been plaguing my mind for a long time, to be precise, it came to me in my mid-twenties, when I found myself in the United Kingdom, a feat that I considered impossible then. I was even geared-up and further inspired after listening to a song of Mike Haliiday that rur-rr-thus, “someday, I’m gonna write the story of my life.”

If however, this book can be completed and published by the time I am seventy years old, it would be a dream come true. I will like to mention that we all have diversified experiences of life, which, if we care to put down, it might serve as a guide for other people. I am number 3 in a family of 16 children born to a polygamist father, who was also a colonial civil servant.

I cannot say when or where I was born, but I have to rely on what I was told by my parents, that I was born 28th January 1933 at Ibadan in Oyo State. I started school in 1939 in St. Andrews Demonstration School at Oyo. Most of our residential life was in the quarters provided for middle class government staff. This aspect played a great part on my orientation and out look on life, since most of my interactions were with people of different nationalities.

I must mention that during my formative years, my mother was no longer with my father, having separated from him earlier. However, I have a caring and loving father who though a polygamist, maintained a strict discipline within his household. I must not forget to mention the very fact that I was entrusted to the care of one of my stepmothers, Madam Nihinlola Alabi, she was very kind and considerate. She took good care of me as a toddler as if I were her own. May her soul rest in peace.

My days started at 6 am except Saturdays and Sundays. I would get washed up and dressed for school, after a breakfast of oqi and akara. (sometimes ole which is now referred to as moi)

I had to trek to school from the government quarters at a distance of about 5 km starting off about 7 am. I cannot remember when the school opened but I know, that I often got there late. The reason for this was not far fetched; I always walked in a snail speed manner watching everything on the road, the ants not excluded. However, I have strict instruction to keep to the side of the road, this I adhere to religiously (It is the same road that leads to Ilorin from Ibadan) a dusty road it was then, because it was late rite. Things were better in those days because, I remember vividly that even though the road was late rite, it was taken care of by sweeping with a big wooden brush pulled by two hefty men and watered down to reduce the velocity of dust whenever a lorry passed by. It was during this period that I first noticed a man who was always giving orders to the road sweepers as the road overseer. He was Chief T A Oni, who later became my father’s-in-law when he married my senior sister, Late Marian Mopelola Alabi (the first born of my father) Whenever I set off for school, I was always giving a mandatory three farthings (onini meta.) They were new and shiny; they were so beautiful and attractive that I always feel reluctant to spend them. However, there was this banana seller at a place called Bode (toll gate) her (paranta) were very irresistible because they were ripe and big and a bunch went for only one farthing. The other two farthings were retained for meal at school, which was more or less free.

I must have left after three years because I was in what was then known as Class 2 after passing through infant one and class 1 and 2. Among my contemporaries at that time were Ayo Banjo (Now Professor Ayo Banjo), Akinola Ayedun (Now a legal luminary), Late Muritala Yusuf An Accountant) and Chief Oyin Ogunmola to mention a few.

It was the usual practice of my father, whenever he was been transferred to any new place, to take with him all of us.
He could not bear to leave his children in the care of anyone
however close

**CHAPTER TWO**
**EDUCATION AND FORMATIVE YEARS**

This was how I found myself at Otapete Methodist School at Ilesha for only six months, only for my father to be transferred again to Oshogbo. There, I was registered at All Saints School, another missionary school which was financed and supervised by the expatriates with the assistance of the local ministers.

I was a complete stranger in the class I was affixed in, my class mates would at first not communicate with me as they probably saw in me an air of superiority, due to my comportment and my obvious background of a child whose father was a colonial civil servant. (Such position was regarded with high respect.)

After a while I began to make friends but I was very slow at catching up with my academic work. This was due to the fact that the class was advanced in their syllabus before I joined in. At the end of the year however, I managed to pass and was promoted to standard one.

It was in the new class that I began to realize what education is really all about. Our class was situated in a big hall divided into many other sections by movable woven mat screens nailed to wood frames. From your class, you can perceive standard 2, your next class if you performed well, and standard 3 the next class after that on yearly basis. That was meant to motivate you to work hard to aspire to a higher class. (During this period, standard 6 was equivalent to the present day SS 3 if not higher.)

I was lucky enough to be placed in a class led by a kind, considerate, sisterly and pretty female teacher known to us then as teacher Ayodele. She gave me a lot of encouragement, and she would not hesitate to discipline me if I got out of line in my academic performance. Wherever she may be now, may the blessing of God be with her and her offsprings.

I was at this school for about 2 years that seemed like eternity with colleagues like:

Eugeneer Tunde Oyefodunm, Lawyer Yemi Shomoye, Late Ademola Idowu former Editor of Daily Sketch, his father was a part-time Organist at the All Saint’s Church Oshogbo, (He was also a civil servant)

Since we were always moving with our father, whenever he was transferred, we left Oshogbo for Benin City, where I was enrolled in a Government School Benin City, and was registered in standard three. In the school, you either spoke English or Edo because nobody spoke Yoruba. However, if you can speak broken English, you can still fit in, otherwise, you are casted out. I could speak none, because my English was not fluent.

There were some Yoruba boys in the school from Owo, Akure, and Lagos, but they pretended not to be Yorubas because, we were in the minority and the majority of them have stayed in Benin for more than a decade. In some cases, some have settled there. However, my background once again saw me through as the son of Chief Clerk and Treasurer. I soon made friends with those from similar background as me. Among whom, were Olu Johnson the son of the Dispenser, Osasuwa Fadaka the son of the Post Master and Olowu the son of the proprietor of the only cinema house in Benin at the time. Our school was a boys’ school then and produced most of the students of Edo College Benin City, which was elitist school.

The Government Residential Area (G.R.A) was a restricted area to the local people. However, as children of the civil servants we could go into the G.R.A. and if confronted by the security agents, we had to mention our father’s names and it was ticketed to room through the G.R.A. plucking fruits such as guavas, mangoes, and the like.

We were not destined to stay long in Benin City, because my father was transferred to Ibadan, our native town. We were put up at the government quarters at Agodi Ibadan, where I actually started in earnest because that was where my father tired from the civil service.

I had wished, like the rest of my colleagues, to pursue a further education at one of the higher schools such as Ibadan, Crammer School, or Boys High School Ibadan. This was not to be, although, certainly not due to lack of admission, as I did not admission into some of them, it was merely by design.

During this rather helpless period, I was cleverly pushed into various options, such as learning the Textile trade, Typing and Shorthand and numerous others.

Since I considered all these diversions to be meant for school drop-outs, I became rebellious and refused to co-operate with my father who failed to see my point that I would rather go further in my education than learn unskilled jobs. He got his advises from my stepmothers which was not in my favour.

One day my father came home and announced that he had spoken to one of his friends regarding my predicament and that friend has agreed to help through his son, who was an Architect, tural draftsman.

My father made it clear that he had not committed himself to it, because he wanted to be sure that it would be in agreement with me too since I had by that time become impossible to talk to, because I was sure that there had to be a good reason for my not furthering my education, and no one seemed to be coming up with positive answers.

I finally agreed to take up the programme because it has a ring of further education to it, and that was what I wanted. I was going to be using Mathematical Textbooks, and Drawing boards. I was pleased about this, because I realized that I could at least have a Profession I could be proud of.

I spent 3 years in training with Late Mr. Bayo Adeyinka of blessed memory.

I was proud to be associated with the profession, as it was a new thing and my boss’s a very elegant and proud person, who was worth emulating.

---

My group at the time, with whom I was in training, was Late R. Oroloju, Rabiu Akaribi, and Tunju Durosaro. They were my seniors in training. These are the names I can remember, I must also mention my long-time friend and junior colleague Mr. Dorton Olithi. Many of us went on to occupy several important posts at ministries, corporations, and corporate bodies. Most of us even went to the United Kingdom to further our training following in the footsteps of our boss late Mr. Adebayo Adeyinka who during our training got a scholarship to go to a Technical College in the United Kingdom.

There was a part of me that was rebellious, in the sense that, we were brought up to be honest and fair in all our dealings with people. My father placed a lot of emphasis on this for all his children. A case in reference was an incident that occurred just after my boss came back from the United Kingdom and we were all ready for our freedom ceremony having completed our training. I must mention here that when my boss was away, we were left to manage the office, which we did diligently and with absolute loyalty. One of his colleagues in the same profession was assigned to over see the running of the office.

However, when my boss returned to Nigeria, he realized that he would need to retain one of us to help him run the office. Having received our reports, he decided that that person would be me. Even though I was quite competent, I had to turn him down because I figured I might not be able to rise to the height of my desire if I should remain with him simply because I did not want to fall behind my other colleagues who have actually secured jobs in some ministries and corporate bodies. This of course caused quite a debate between my father and his father, but I remained adamant to grab at the opportunity of going further with my studies. Prior to this episode I had taken a test at the PWD (now called the Ministry of Works) with a view to being employed as a Draughtsman cum Technical Assistant, this profession was very high in demand at the time because it bridges the gap between engineers and Architects who were then mostly

**CHAPTER THREE**
**VOCATIONAL TRAINING**

On our arrival in Ibadan, my father carried out a major reorganization of his entire family, leaving majority of them at the family house in Oranyan, while the remaining few stayed with him at the government quarters. I was among few who stayed with him father, along with my junior brother (Lekan) as well as a couple of our cousins (Late Dipo) and Depo. During this period, my senior brother (Tunji) and sister (Mope) were both in the boarding house and only return home during the holidays.

My father was by now living with his junior wife Madam Ebun and her two sisters (Late Safuratu and Wosilatu). It was obvious then that my father was running two homes. It was a case of “another life another time” entirely. I will limit myself at this point, to our life at the quarters.

Our routines began at 6 am everyday, when we would reluctantly get up in the mornings with series of harsh words from the adult in charge to get us out of bed. The household chores consisted of straightening the sitting room and our father’s bedroom, as well as the kitchen and the sweeping of the compound.

This chores were done on weekly rotations among three of us while the eldest is left to clean the car and split firewood for cooking, which of course was occasional. The week you get the job of cleaning both our father’s bedroom and the sitting room, you are regarded as doing the elite job; you are favoured and respected by the others because if you get to report anybody or incidents to our father, it will be taken as the gospel truth without any question.

Us three would leave home every morning for school, at 7:30am, and we had to walk from Agodi barefooted to Oranyan or our school (Oluibadan School), my junior brother Lekan would continue to St. David School Kudeti.

---

We were then known as habitual latecomers, but we managed to escape punishment due to the influence of our father. Sometimes, we had to return bundles of clothes to the family house at Oranyan before proceeding to school, these were clothes that the washman has earlier brought to the quarters after washing. We often despise this chores, as it often embarrassed us to be seen by these other two girls who resided also within the quarters like us. I particularly had eyes for one of the girls. Myself, my brother and my cousin considered them to be more privileged, because they attended St. Mary’s Catholic School Idikan, and unlike us, they always went to school by bus. It was when we had to run this unfortunate chore that we often consider ourselves to be suffer-heads, which was quite ironic to say the least.

As you will find out later on in this book, I was a boy that some people loved to hate at the time. I must state clearly here that it was not due to any evil machination rather in my star. I got along with honest people, only mediocres I cannot stand.

I happened to be an average student in my days. My most hated subject in school was Arithmetic, to the point that I actually developed a special hatred for Durel the author of the Arithmetic Textbook we were using at the time. I often cursed him secretly for introducing Arithmetic in the first place.

At the time, we were being taught, Calculations, Algebra, and Geometry, I will like to think that these still exists in schools today. In our time, it was usual that papers were set for examination by other teachers other than our class teacher to forstall favoritism. I was good in all other subjects especially English. There was even a time I had a score of 100% in the English examination but was reduced to 95% because the teacher was baffled that how could I have scored such a high mark, therefore, he picked out 5% reduction for rough work. That year, I scored only 10% in Math, nevertheless, I was promoted to standard five. However, I managed to pass out from school at standard six after taking a General Examination involving all the primary schools in Ibadan and all the other neighboring towns, as was then the practice.

### Equations

I got the appointment, but my father insisted that I should continue with my boss as he has had a lengthy discussion with my boss's father, and he would not want their friendship to be ruined by my "ungrateful attitude." Naturally, since I have made my feelings known to all concerned, I refused to co-operate once again.

One day I was at home, when my friend Mr. Dotun Olubajo came and informed me that more hands were needed at Reddifusion Nigeria Limited (a place where he was working). I was so happy, and I jumped at the offer. I remain very grateful to Mr. Olubajo for that gesture. I started working at R.N.L. on a salary of four pounds (£4) a month. I was on top of the world. I had my fun as a man working on a profession he enjoyed. However my ambition did not rest there. I wrote several applications to colleges both in Britain and the United States, seeking admission to study architecture. I got one with a scholarship attached, at William Pen's College Oskaloosa Iowa with the following conditions:

1. The admission shall be delayed for one year because a Nigerian was using the same scholarship.
2. That I must provide my own transport fee and feeding allowance.

The whole programme was scuttled by lack of finance and interferences from the extended family. I did not give up.

At the Reddifusion Nigeria Limited, an expansion programme was going on and the next place of operation was Lagos. Mr. Olubaju was my immediate boss, therefore the expatriate boss consulted with him on who he can recommend to go to Lagos with him.

He was to go and establish the new Drawing Office and the Technical section before moving on to other places. I was the only one who opted to go because the rest in my department did not consider Lagos to be a good place to live, for anyone who had a family reputation to keep.

When my father got to know about this, he immediately contacted one of our expatriate bosses whom he knew very well in the civil service, but has since crossed over to Reddifusion Nigeria Limited.

The expatriates came into our office one afternoon and he wanted to know who was Alabi amongst us. He now asked why was it that my father did not want me to go to Lagos. I could not give him an answer to that, but I explained we were only going to go for three months to help in establishing the Lagos Office. He agreed to have a word with my father. With this new development, I was determined not to inform my father before I left for Lagos, because there had been too many interferences with my life up to that point I couldn't take any more.

The day we were to leave for Lagos, it was arranged that the company vehicle was going to pick us up from our different locations, but I promptly agreed to join at the company premises at Oke Are (now being used by Galaxy Television Station). I had been packing my personal belongings from time to time and hiding them with an uncle who knew how to keep secrets and very sympathetic towards my course (He is now the Mogaji of Opomulero Family, Chief Eban Fasola). It was my intention to leave before my father returned from work, but on the day I was to join the vehicle, I met my father on the way. I greeted him nicely, and it was then he told me that he realized I was going for a short period and therefore he prayed for me and gave me some useful advises all by the road side.

I left Ibadan carrying my sleeping mat under my arm and my suitcase securely balanced on my head. It was my second trip to Lagos. The first was when I came to sit for the Entrance Examination of C.M.S. Grammar School.

**CHAPTER FOUR**
**THE TRIP TO LAGOS AND SUBSEQUENT EMPLOYMENTS**

My arrival in Lagos was a complete different story. It was like a J.C (Johnny Just Come)! I first breath an air of freedom, because, if I was a certain come there and I was bent on making a success of it.

On our arrival in Lagos, the company vehicle dropped me at my senior brother’s address. He was sharing a room with a friend at Ibadan Street, Ebute Metta. A coincident:

My brother Chief Tunji Alabi had been expecting me, and had left a message for me to make myself comfortable until he returned from work. I was sitting outside the house, still finding my temperamental, and at the same time unaware of the hostile and hostile of Lagos life, which my brother returned from work. We exchanged pleasantries, and I gave him news from home.

The following day, I began my working life in Lagos. I was able to get to my new work place without any problem, because, my brother had described how to get there, the office was at Commercial Avenue Yaba. I was the first to arrive. Our apartment was welcomed us and told us to relax and be comfortable, work was not to start until later.

Lagos is my own perfection, is composed of three distinct inhabitants each as:

1. **THE INDIGENES** as represented by the Isale-Eko dwellers, the off springs of the chiefish-like the Odugbolas, Arompe, Obainkoro, Asogbem, Odomiles and the Keesokos all headed by the Oba of Lagos.

2. **THE IMMIGRANTS** as represented by the dwellers around Igboere, Tokunbo, Campus, Omikan, Bamgbose and Odolagbafe. These people are mostly from Portugal, Brazil, Ghana, Togo, Siam Leone and the Spanish Island of Fernando and so on.

3. **THE SETTLERS:** These are mainly people who came to work in Lagos from upcountry like Abeokuta, Ijebu, Ekiti, Ilesha, Ibadan, Oyo and Offa. Most of these people are railway workers, expatriate company workers, speculators, traders and civil servants. These set of people are found at Ebute-Meta (East and West) Yiba, and theradjoining areas. My life in Lagos started in earnest. I wanted to know so many things about Lagos lifestyle. I was particularly curious to know why my father was so biased about Lagos that he vowed none of his children would go there to live.

I made some friends around the area that I lived, particularly Kwesi Anthony, a Ghanaian and then a student of Igboi College Yaba, and Ayo Ososami who was a student of C.M.S. Grammar School Lagos. My two friends introduced me to some of their friends. However, I never made friends in the office because we were all “green horns” in Lagos. I enjoyed my job and I bad job satisfaction. We had to map out all areas of Lagos for the purpose of establishing the company’s network, which gave me the opportunity to familiarize myself with Lagos within a very short period. I was able to see Lagos life in its nudity and assimilate those that can be beneficial to my planned programme and I was also able to discard those that did not conform to my expectation.

Within a year, we had established a Lagos network; it was time to move on to other towns. Abeokuta was the next town but one of us had to stay in Lagos to oversee the continuity of the programme. This included carrying out both the expansion and

**CHAPTER FIVE**
**TRAVEL TO THE UNITED KINGDOM**

he was full of prayers for me. May God grant him a perfect rest and bless his offsprings wherever they might be. The man acted like a father to me. When my colleagues and the expatriates at the office learnt about the reason for my resignation, they were so impressed to say the least.

I left Nigeria at the end of August 1956. I was in Lagos 3 days before my departure, in the company of my friend, Mr. Segun Banjoko popularly known as “asegy banjy”. During the three days, we did not sleep in the same house twice, we kept moving so that no one will know where we were. My father and my late senior Sister Madam Mopelola Oni were in Lagos a day to my departure.

My father came with a retinue of wives, and my sister with her own friends. However, by evening time when I was no where in sight, my father became worried that the whole thing could have been a put on show for nothing to happen, so he called my sister aside quietly and asked her if everything was still in order about my travel.

At about 7 pm, I breezed in with my friend (a rather delibrate act). The reception was quiet, and my sister dragged me aside to ask if I would still be traveling, because, my father was worried. I showed her all my travel documents to assure her that I was still going to travel, but that I just had to use a bit of decoy strategy to avoid any unwelcome disruption. She was naturally pleased to hear that and as it was typical of her that time, she called for a celebration. I also found out that my father had requested a song for me at the Nigerian Broadcasting Service (as it was known then). My friend and I left the party quietly at about 8 pm.

The following day, an expatriate friend Mr. Bland who was an Architect at the office, picked me up to go to the Wharf at Apapa. My sister and father were both at the wharf to see me off, and I could tell that, that day was one of the happiest days of their lives (both, off blessed memories) I had to maintain a straight face to indicate there was no room for sentiment, as the moment was another dream come true for me.

It was a wonderful and an exciting trip on board the General Managing, with other Nigerians and French speaking Africans as well as some top ranking African delegates to the French National Assembly.

I arrived in England through Le-Havre by crossing the channel to Southampton. But, before I could arrive at Le-Havre, I got on the wrong train due to language barrier. The train I got on was going to Lyon but the ticket inspector who cried out “ola la” when he saw our tickets and realized that all of us Nigerians have entered the wrong train, directed us to the next train to Le-Havre.

On board the boat train, I shared a cabin with a young American student from Preston University in the U.S.A. We introduced ourselves and he wanted to know where I came from and when I told him I was from Nigeria, his next question was “is that from South Wales in England?” I realized that I knew all about his country but he had absolutely no knowledge of mine. This was my first experience of what to expect regarding the importance of my country in world knowledge and perception.

The following morning, I arrived at Southampton having crossed the Channel all night. With nothing to declare, I went through the customs with ease and I caught a train to London Waterloo station, where my brother and his wife met me. I was so taken by the sights around me that I watched with opened mouth. As I made my way out towards the exit, I caught sight of one of our expatriates at Costain (West Africa) Ltd Nigeria as he was trying to load his luggage onto a trolley. I tried to say hello to him, but he completely ignored me. This is another lesson I was yet to learn about the culture of the English.

When we arrived at the house where my brother and his wife lived, I felt like paradise on earth with the approaching road-

**CHAPTER SIX**
**LIFE IN THE UNITED KINGDOM**

**CHAPTER SEVEN**
**RETURN TO NIGERIA**

I got married in 1958 at a Church in West London, to my wife whom I met at the naming ceremony of my friend’s daughter. This friend was my best man - Engr. Fola Olaofe. When I first saw my wife, I mistook her for a lady I once knew in Lagos. Mum Bumi Savage but never got to speak to. But as it turned out, my wife went to school with the lady and they were friends. I told her they look so much alike. In short, that was how our relationship started and led to marriage. She is the daughter of an Ebute-metta Settler. Another dream come true.

I returned to Nigeria after 4 years, not because I wanted to, but for personal reasons beyond my control. I loved my life in the United Kingdom and I wished I had made my home there.

While I was in Britain, I worked on various sites where Ove-Arup was involved. My first site was the English and Scottish Bank in the city, under my able and most considerate mentor Engineer Anderson.

The method of building in Britain is different to what obtains here in Nigeria. Due to lack of land space, buildings are constructed right deep into the ground, which produces floors right from the depth, often referred to as basement, sub-basement, me Zane floors before the original ground floor. From the English and Scottish bank site, I was moved to Guild’s College Development in South Kensington, still under Engineer Anderson. When he retired from Ove-Arup, I was attached to Engineer Jack Waller and moved site to Crystal Palace Sports Stadium and later to the Barbican Project in the city. The experiences I gain from these project sites spread over a period of 3 years and can never be bought with money, but can make one into a very good engineer cum builder. If one were to take the job serious enough.

This was where my practical experience came from.

---

builder and contractor. After reaching the O.N.C level, I enrolled as a graduate of the Institute of Engineering Designers of Great Portland place London.

Before leaving for Nigeria, I had three job interviews with three different companies, the Lagos Executive Development Board, the Shell B.P. and the Nigerian Pre-stressed Concrete Company I opted for both Shell B.P. and Pre-stress but the application can only take effect on my arrival at home. I informed Shell B.P. on my arrival in Nigeria, and a flight was arranged for me to visit their head office in Port Harcourt, this was my first experience to travel by air.

On my arrival in Port Harcourt, I took a shuttle plane to Owerri, which was their base at the time. I sensed at the meeting that I was largely discriminated against, by the overwhelming number of the whites bosses there. Naturally, I resented this, and I went back to Ibadan via Lagos.

When we arrived in Nigeria, my late sister had to take care of our accommodation. She also helped with food and money. One of her numerous good deeds that I will always remember her for. She was a sister indeed, not only to me but also unto anyone who was ready to recognize her as such.

I went back to Abeokuta to start work with the Pre-stressed Company. I was then being groomed to take over from the marketing manager who was to take over from the general manager of the company. The job required somebody with experience in reinforced concrete; I had by that time acquired a certificate in reinforced concrete structures from Cement and Concrete Association of Britain. The job at Abeokuta was a new concept at the time, using pre-stressed components. A French expatriate Mr. Bique manned the factory, and I was expected to promote the idea to the Government and Institutions. I loved the job, and it was very promising and as it has always been with me, I wanted to make a success of it.

However, I did not envisage that the Nigerian factor and human angle would eventually rear its ugly head. It came to knowledge, that the man who was then the Administrator of had his eyes on that position. Even though he was not technically qualified for the post, he made every move to frustrate my efforts having determined that no one will stay long on the job unless I got the post. Things came to a head and I had to choose between resigning my post and staying to continue the struggle with him rather diabolical man. During a trip to Benn, I won a contract for the company on the Benin Township drainage, on my return to Abeokuta I learnt that our General Manager had been hospitalized. I went straight to the hospital to see how he was and give him him the good news. He asked me to work out the contract details and pass it on to the Admin. Clerk for processing. This instruction I followed to the letter, but to my shock and horror I later found out that the man deliberately failed to process the contract and since the project co-ordinator of the Benin project did not get a feed-back from us at the designated time, he awarded the contract to our runner-up and my company lost the contract. With all the trials and tribulations I endured on this job, I began to realize that only God could save me from the hands of satanic agents, which one tend to become when we make it our duty to thwart our fellow human beings’ efforts to succeed.

We were born into Christianity, our father accepted Christianity many years back, and he even brought his own aged mother into it. I had by now realize that in life, there are two situations, one of them being Existence and the other being Living.

When one is young, and without any responsibilities, if the unexpected should happen during this time, one would simply leave the scene unceremoniously without affecting anyone else’s life. If however, you attain the stage of responsibility, you will want to do anything to protect your interests and that of those dependent on you. This was exactly my reaction when I realized that there could be some form of satanic influence on some aspects of my life.

During my formative years, I used to dream of sinister events like falling into bottomless pits filled with broken bottles and all types of dangerous tools and weapons. Sometimes, masquerades and bulls will be chasing me. I also used to dream of finding myself in several fatal accidents, including plane crashes. I have often woken up dismissing them since there was no one to tell them to. This was the situation with my first job, when I had to resign my position after several unbearable and ugly incidents, during which I lost my father few months after my arrival into the country.

I left Abeokuta for Lagos, to become an unexpected guest at my senior brother’s house together with my family. I knew it was not going to be easy off-loading ourselves unto him and his family like that but there was no other alternative. My brother was already self-employed by this time as a practicing Accountant and Auditor. He was still struggling but not worse off by the standard then. The wife was also working.

My brother had to take up the up-keep of his family as well as mine since neither my wife nor I was working. My brother never complained, you could hardly notice the strain on him, and he continued to encourage us that things will get better. I raise my cap to him and praise his courage and devotion to the welfare of my family. Little did I realize that this was going to be the beginning of a very rough and trying time of my life.

I began to look for work here and there, roaming the streets of Lagos and the environs, sometimes walking from Surulere to Oshodi. In most cases I would come back home disappointed. One day my brother came home and announced that he had managed to secure a contract for me through one of his clients. I was so happy and of course I naturally thought a break through has finally come. What I had to do was to provide labour and dig trenches for this company, which was engaged in laying cables for the new Ijora Power Station. It was my first time to experience contract work and it was a complete disaster. I could not control the workers effectively because I was too simple and gentle with them. They took advantage of this and whenever I was not there nothing got done. The expatriate supervisor while watching the end of things realized that the contract was running behind the due and decided to terminate the contract with me. I was paid on for what we did and I in turn paid off the workers, and I will be with practically nothing to take home. This bunch of untrained formidable labourers had it in for me. They wanted more and all the way from Mushin they followed me to my brother’s house in Sunlere shouting and demanding for more money. I had my first experience of being a contractor.

During a routine audit job at the office of the Italian man who sub-contracted the job to me, my brother mentioned my experience to him, he was very understanding but he felt that even though I was an honest person, I was too soft on the workers. Infact he felt I needed to be tough to be a contractor. He decided to take me on board at his company as a supervisor.

I started with the company as supervisor on the same level as expatriates but not on the same salary. The remuneration however was enough to take care of my pressing needs. Before then, I had bought a car from a very kind and generous uncle, late Mr Lahan Bamigbade. After I gave him a deposit of fifteen pounds (£15) to purchase the car (a Wolseley), I never paid a penny more on the outstanding balance since then. Whenever my uncle wanted to refer to the deal, he would say in a jovial way: “Where do you see anybody buying a car for fifteen pounds?” It is only Dusu (that’s me) who can do such a thing. He loved me so much, may his soul continue to rest in perfect peace. I would drive the car to work and park it at the office. Work started at 7 a.m., from there we would be taken to our respective sites after the day’s briefing.

No supervisor wore a watch, because our work went on till 7 p.m. before we would say ‘goodnight’. After a month with the company, I moved to a boy’s quarter with my family within the same neighbourhood, which my brother helped to secure. Shortly after this, my wife also secured a job with Atlas Nigeria Limited at Anana. My friend, who helped me to get into Costain in those days, was helping to give her a lift to work. He was then working at Anapa and lived close by. In those days, once you have just arrived from the United Kingdom, the notion was such that you are expected to have a prestigious job and a car to go with it and close from work at 2p m. in the afternoon to have time for idleness. Such was the case when an inlaw who saw me at Appapa while I was supervising some workers by the road side, went to my mother-in-law and told her that she felt things must be quite rough for me if she could find me by the road side with some labourers, “what sort of job is that”?

She then advised that perhaps the family should gather some money together and send me back to Britain. Of Course, my mother-in-law had to explain that I am a contractor.

The Nigerian workers are really terrible workers and one has to be vigilant to be able to contain them. The same goes for the people, particularly in this country. For some reason they can be quite dishonest, while at the same time, not bear to trust anyone, as they believe that everyone else is like them.

A particular example was when my workers would buy food on credit and not pay up as they have promised. They would even give the lady a false name like Raimi-carpenter or Karimu-bender. The timekeeper whom I instructed to make sure he collected the money from them for the woman, even decided to pull a fast one. Instead of him to pay up the money he collected, he referred the woman to me to come and collected the money, as he claimed I still owed them their wages. Of course, by this time, I knew how to handle these crooks. One large ‘roar’ from me out of anger, he quickly brought out the money to pay the woman But I warned that from then on, I did not want to hear any more about money owed, they should sort it amongst themselves.

I was later moved into the office to assist the Managing Director in the regular running of the company’s affair. He put me through the process of entries of daily expenditures to the la-penny. I was to constantly monitor the fluctuating prices of construction materials in the industry, regulate the maintenance and fuelling of all company vehicles, pay all the workers, and I was responsible for going round all the building sites and take stock of materials and record each site’s needs. The Managing Director was instrumental in my becoming a contractor, he taught me how to facilitate and subsidize to save money in times of an emergency on any contract. He had so much trust in me that whenever he went home to Venezuela to visit his wife and children he would leave me in charge to run the business. He had a junior brother who was also working with the company but a spend thrift. His junior brother then began to insinuate that I must have worked some “juju” on his brother who seemed to have built so much trust in me that he would leave me in charge of everything. Of course these were rumours fabricated by the M. D.’s Jiebu driver who himself was a very fetish man.

In two years, we finished the first phase of the project and we were waiting for the second phase to start. However, the government suspended the project due to lack of funds, and as a result, the company folded up temporarily. This time I had to face bidding for, and executing contracts on my own. I later realized that, as the saying goes “all that glitters is not gold”.

I got a sub-contract from T.A. Oni & Sons at the University of Lagos to build some Staff quarters. We were supplied with materials but we had to provide labour to construct about 3-4 houses. I was delighted because I realized it would be an opportunity for me to put my training and experience to work. The first problem I encountered was short supply of building materials, which the company promised us, this made us to run the project at a loss. With all these happening, I decided to cut my losses and measured the job we had done and then asked for the payment. But as it was common with most Nigerians, payment was not forthcoming. When the situation became unmanageable, I had to call on my sister to intervene. My sister was married to Chief T.A. Oni. I waited for a feed-back and there was none, therefore I went further to get a lawyer to serve the company a notice about my intention to seek judicial arbitration. This of course sparked off a family row, because my sister became furious and reported me to our father’s most senior sister. I was summoned to Ibadan, when I got there I explained the situation to my aunt and I even presented some documents to justify my actions. I made her to understand that I felt Chief T. A. Oni was in a position to sort the situation but he refused, I loved my sister and I wouldn’t do anything to hurt her feelings. I just had to prove that I know my rights within the limits of the Law, which from all indication Chief Oni did not believe in. The issue was entirely between the company and myself. It was nothing personal.

In the end I had to give up the whole process of retrieving my money in order to save the relationship between my sister and myself from going sour. I was never paid a penny out of what T.A. Oni & Sons owed me. As for my sister, may God continue to rest her soul in peace.

**CHAPTER EIGHT**
**EXPERIENCE OF LIFE**

I continue to get contracts here and there, but I often ran into the problem of financing them. The situation continued unchanged, my wife changed her job to work with Union Bank and she was looking after the house, in the meantime, my mother-in-law was supporting us with money and food. Our acquaintances were beginning to suggest that we should seek divine intervention. Before then, I had visited many native doctors, hoping that they could help turn things around for good, but each visit was always followed by severe and drastic set backs. My knowledge at the time was limited. When I was growing up I was a member of the Choir at our Church, St. David Kudeti now Cathedral Church of St. David Kudeti - Anglican Communion. We saw it then as my father’s wish for us to belong to a church and a place for social interaction.

However, I decided to seek divine intervention by joining the Cherubim and Seraphim church, which was introduced to us by a friend. After a while, I realized that the leader of the church was doing things as he pleased in the church, and not teaching according to the scriptures. I had to endure for a while since I did not want people to get the impression that I was not patient enough. One day, God’s intervention came, my family and I were not in church on that day, when according to the news that reached us, the proprietor of the church came and pulled down the structure and carted away all the furniture on accusation that he heard that the church leader was trying to completely take over the property and turn it into his own. That was the end of that one as far as I was concerned its good radiance to bad rubbish! I did not give the man the “light of day” again even when he went round begging members to return to his new venue.

I was into several other churches seeking, not God but means to become wealthy. I had a friend with whom I used to go out drinking, we usually go in the same car, but I noticed that whenever it was his turn to take us in his car, as soon as we were settling into enjoying the evening in full swing, he would start to hurry us up to go, because he had to go and pick his wife up from where he had dropped her earlier.

My wife later found out while talking to his wife that she attended a church called the Celestial Church of Christ, but she knew her husband would not mention it to me because he did not want to join, since he could not abide with the rules. She decided to take my wife along one day, my wife joined immediately and came home to inform me that she liked the church and I should let us all try it. By this time, I had lost interest in all of these churches and their dubious and fruitless practices. So, I told my wife to continue going there for a while, find out how the place really is then I might consider joining if she is satisfied with her findings. I began to act like my friend, I would drop her at the church, go off drinking and picked her up later. One day, while I was waiting to pick her up in the car, a prophetic message came out, which was meant for me, I was called into the church to listen to the message. A lot was said and the one that caught my attention the most was when he mentioned that I was going to make a trip overseas by air. I had to discontinue this as I had not traveled for over ten years and I could not boast of possessing a passport any longer as the one I had had expired. But during the following week, things started happening. I was in the office of the Federation of Building and Civil Engineering Contractors of Nigeria of which I was the current President. (I have to mention that, I became the first Nigerian President of the Association after an election that earned me an overwhelming majority. This was with the

**CHAPTER NINE**
**RETURN TO IBADAN**

I returned to Ibadan 18 years after I left the city for Lagos with a Portmanteau and a sleeping mat. However, my return can be regarded as a ‘triumphant return’, because, I came back with a car, comfortable and happy family. I decided to move from Lagos to Ibadan where things are relatively cheaper and I was then looking forward to owing my own house. The prices of land and the cost of putting up buildings were skyrocketing in Lagos then, as I believe they still are today.

In December 1971, while attending our Church’s Annual Convention at the Republic of Benin (Then, called Dahomey), a visionary told me, that I would be moving base by January 1972 and that I should pray against an accident during the move. In those days, Celestial Church messages were authentic, as opposed to what I heard the Church had become today. True enough, my family and I made the move, and on the trip, just as we were approaching a corner near the Owode Estate in Ibadan, the car I was driving nearly somersaulted, but with God on our side, the accident was completely averted. We went to the Celestial Church Yemetu, as advised from Lagos, for a special prayer. There we met the head, late Most Senior Evangelist Salako, a gentleman of exemplary character, may God rest his soul.

We settled in Ibadan, in the house we rented. However, my wife could not stay with us right away, because she had to arrange her transfer from Lagos Union Bank where she was working, to Ibadan branch. With this situation, my wife commuted between Lagos and Ibadan every weekend and on Mondays, we used to travel down to Lagos because I still maintain an office and lots of business interests in Lagos.

During my early days in the Celestial Church of Christ, message was given to me that I would have business dealings with some expatriates, I was looking forward to it, but my conception of the message was wrong. I thought I should have been more careful about the language.

When I got to Ibadan, my first job was the Agbovo Shopping Complex, which was being handled by Solel Boneh. With the expertise we brought to the job, Solel-Boneh was happy to make me their main sub-contractor. This relationship continued for more than fifteen years, to the Glory of God. I will not fail to mention that we had some set backs, shortly after our arrival in Ibadan. Some will put it down to sheer back luck, while some will classify it as a spiritual attack. Whatever it was, I know that it only gave us the cause to glorify the Almighty God.

We arrived in Ibadan with two vehicles, a saloon car and a business pick-up truck. Within a short period, we bought two more trucks through a good friend Engineer O. O. Diyaolu, He was then the Chief Engineer at the Nigeria Water Resources Company, which is a subsidiary of Solel-Boneh, and past president of the Federation of Building and Civil Engineering Contractors in Nigeria. Our first two years in Ibadan were blissful, business was good, and I made several business trips to the Northern parts of the country mostly by air. I was then a member of the Recreation Club Ibadan and I took to playing golf, both for pleasure and business purposes. I used to take my golf kit with me on some of my trips, as the membership of the club gave an automatic access to affiliated clubs in Zaria, Kano, and Jos. At that time I had a branch office of my company in Kaduna.

However, after the third year of our arrival in Ibadan, things began to "fall apart". There was a decline in business activities, and I had to sell all the vehicles except the car I was hoping for. I ended up selling the car also. I remained undaunted, and I maintained my membership at the Celestial Church. At this time, my wife had come to join us permanently in Ibadan. We were both very active in the church.

We both believed so much in the message of the visionaries, and they had a field day pushing us about especially when we moved from Yemetu branch to Odo-ona branch, which was founded by a retired senior civil servant. We thought there would be an orderly approach to the method of worship, but the opposite was the case. There were so many intrigues, character assassination, and selfish interest.

Our financial situation continued for a while until Solel-Boneh awarded me contract and my wife too was granted a loan to buy a car, by Union Bank. As if by miracle, things began to look up for us again. I became so pre-occupied by Solel-Boneh contracts that I hardly had time for any other job. My wife's car was an asset, I used it most to run my business.

There were so many adversaries, but the first surprise came for most of them, when my first daughter finished her secondary school education and we found we could realize our dream by sending her for further education in the United Kingdom. The general impression was that we couldn't pay for a secondary school education let alone an overseas education. My wife and I maintained a low profile, and a very simple and humble life to be able to continue to maintain our children's education both at home and abroad. We give glory to God for his continued faithfulness.

Remembering the message of visionary who said I will be doing business with expatriates, I remained with Solel-Boneh for well over fifteen years without competition and I became the most sort after water-proofing contractor.

**CHAPTER TEN**
**SETTLED DOWN FINALLY IN IBADAN**

**FINALLY SETTLING DOWN IN IBADAN**

Good things don’t last forever. After fifteen years of work, ship at the church, I left. The reason for my leaving the church will fill up another book. Therefore, I shall skip that.

However, let me now confess here that I became spiritually endowed and fulfilled when I discovered the workings of our Lord Jesus Christ and our Father the Almighty God. I discovered that as a child of God, I need not fear any evil that is perpetuated against me. If I make bold to say that I am a Nazirite to God after all my tribulations, I shall not be wrong. I had a period of spiritual discovery, and learnt that besides Jesus Christ, there is no other intermediary between the Almighty God and man. Before we were born, He knew what He wanted us to be, and nothing can change that. He is always ready to stand, protect and guide us. One thing though, is not to destroy what we cannot create. If we have faith in Him, with prayers, He is always ready to provide for our needs.

I will be seventy in January year 2003. I have had a fulfilled life, rose from grass to grace, became an achiever, and blessed with a loving dedicated wife and five glorious children (four girls and one boy) through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I hope anyone who reads this book will borrow a leaf from all my experiences, and find solace in the knowledge of the true existence of the Almighty God.

Thirteen years after our arrival in Ibadan, God gave us the means to build our own property, which was ready just in time for the conjugal marriage of our first daughter. To God be the glory, as He granted my prayer request that “whenever any of my children were to be married, I would want it to be in our own home and not in a rented property”.